D. CENTRALLY MEDIATED DISORDERS OF GI PAIN

D1. CENTRALLY MEDIATED ABDOMINAL PAIN SYNDROME (CAPS)

Diagnostic criteria for CAPS must include all of the following:

1. Persistent abdominal pain, either continuous or nearly continuous.
2. Pain typically has no or only occasional relationship with physiological events such as eating, defecation, or menstruation.
3. The pain interferes significantly with daily functioning, affecting activities like work, intimacy, social life, and caregiving. 
4. The pain is genuine and not feigned.
5. Cannot be explained by another structural or functional gastrointestinal disorder or different medical condition.
   - This criterion has been met for at least the last 3 months with symptom onset at least 6 months before diagnosis.
   - Although CAPS may be associated with psychosocial issues, there is no specific psychosocial profile required for diagnosis.

D2. NARCOTIC BOWEL SYNDROME/OPIOID-INDUCED GI HYPERALGESIA

Diagnostic criteria must include all of the following:

1. Chronic or frequently recurring abdominal pain that is treated with either acute high doses or chronic use of narcotics.
2. The nature and severity of the pain are not accounted for by a current or previous gastrointestinal diagnosis.
3. Additionally, at least two of the following conditions must be present:
   a. Pain that worsens or does not subside with continued or increased doses of narcotics.
   b. Markedly greater pain when the narcotic dose decreases, with improvement upon re-administration (characterized by a "soar and crash" pattern).
   c. Increasing episodes of pain in terms of frequency, duration, and intensity over time.
   - Pain should be present on most days.
   - Patients may have a coexisting structural diagnosis (such as inflammatory bowel disease or chronic pancreatitis), but this alone is insufficient to explain the pain symptoms.

Source/Citation: 
ROME IV Diagnostic Criteria for Disorders of Gut-Brain Interaction (DGBI). (2016). The Rome Foundation.
